Chapter 3 (#58)
the-teachingRSE-project/RSECurriculum4NaturalScience: index.qmd

# Software Engineering and Research Applications: Divergence

The close relationship between computation and science
did not make science the primary application domain for the discipline concerned with the professional production of software
that is called Software Engineering today.
In the early days of transistor and integrated circuit based computers,
programming as an activity was dominated by the mathematics, science and engineering communities.

> Starting in the late 1950ies, large computers became available to universities and research institutions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting in the late 1950s, large computers became available to universities and research institutions
```

"*Area 1: detailed design and coding of systems software by experts in a relatively economics-independent context.*
Unfortunately, the most pressing software development problems are in an area we shall call *Area 2: requirements analysis design, test, and maintenance of applications software by technicians in an economics-driven context.*"

He continues "And in Area 2, our scientific foundations are so slight that one can seriously question whether our current techniques deserve to be called "software engineering."
This question has been answered in the positive by the academic community by now.
However, it took well into the 21st century for software engineering to fully emancipate from computer science (see e.g. @parnas1999).
Today, software engineering has developed into a mature academic discipline in its own right,
has an extensive body of knowledge (see @swebok2024), continually increases its number of sub-disciplines,

> is taught in numerous degree-programs and produces highly sought-after professionals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is taught in numerous degree-programs, and produces highly sought-after professionals.
```
a good case for an Oxford comma

Software engineers "need to learn the key engineering skills to enable them to build products that are safe for the public to use" [@oregan2012]
and consider the "challenges and constraints of 'industrial-strength' software in a competitive market" [@mahoney2004].
Moreover, software engineering was influenced by the aim of serving management needs
such as analysis and design matching hierarchical division of projects, hierarchical assignment of tasks and methods for cost accounting and estimation [@mahoney2004].

> A direct application of SE techniques in the research context is often not feasible or necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A direct application of SE techniques in the research context is often neither feasible nor necessary.
```

If the developer coincides with user, requirements analysis for example looses importance.
Scientific software development frequently aims exclusively at the production of code that supports a specific investigation where speed is often of the essence.
Hence, the whole software construction process might best be characterized as "rapid prototyping"

> and forego the level of planning that would be required by SE best practices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and foregoes the level of planning that would be required by SE best practices.
```

In a business-context, the externalization of knowledge about the software in the form of the documentation
(of the development process, of the internal functioning of the software and of the user-facing functionality) is very important,
but hardly plays a role in many scientific applications, where users are domain-experts and can read and modify the source code.

For these reasons the community of software developers in science has lost touch with mainstream software engineering,
which for a long time had little to offer to a domain where for example state-of-the-art software-projects are written in Fortran [e.g. @powers2017].

> There are efforts from the software engineering community to identify and describe the lack of adoption of software engineering principles in computational science [@Kelly2007; @Johanson2018],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are efforts from the software engineering community to identify and describe the lack of adoption of software engineering principles in computational science [@Kelly2007; @Johanson2018].
```

> but activity to improve the situation has mainly come from the newly emerging community of Research Software Engineers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, activities to improve this situation have mainly come from the newly emerging community of Research Software Engineers. 
```
